Just before we get started with today's video,
do you wanna give a quick plug to my new podcast, the casual criminalist,
we cover a lot of crimes, criminals,
bad things on this channel because apparently you guys just love the darkest
stuff. Well,
eat your black heart out because I now have a long form about an hour long,
weekly podcast covering some of the darkest things that I could find from the UK
doctor who was the worst serial killer in history to the time in American
socialite, murdered her best friend with her car, allegedly,
and totally got away with it and much more,
but is also laid back more freeform with the occasional laugh because isn't
death hilarious. So let's jump into it today,
Jack, the ripper, the Sodi act.
These are names that still evoke fear and dread in the hearts of many people
decades, even centuries after they were first mentioned,
this is due to a simple reason. They would've a court or identified.
These men were able to carry out gruesome killing sprees,
fulfilling their darkest desires, and then get away with it for decades.
There was another chilling name on that list. B T K short for binds,
torture kill a murder maniac. He began terrorizing Wichita, Kansas.
During the 1970s, he aided capture during the original investigation.
During the eighties and early nineties,
he had become such a ghost that he killed three more people without the police,
even realizing that it was him doing it afterwards,
he completely went underground,
stopped all communication and raised all hope that he might one day be
identified.
Well, almost all hope in the end,
his craving for attention made him reach out again. One mistake later,
and he was identified and arrested.
It might have happened 30 years after his killing spree started,
but BTK finally had a real name. Dennis Rader.
Dennis Lynn Rader was born on March the ninth, nineteen forty five,
one of four sons to William and Dorothea Rader. He was born in Pittsburgh,
Kansas,
but raised in Wichita the same place where he would carry out his spree of era
decades later. Rita attended Wichita Heights,
high school and later enrolled at Wichita state university in 1964.
College wasn't for him though.
So he dropped out and joined the United States air force when he was 21 and
spent the next four years as a mechanic.
When he returns back to Kansas R wanted to complete his college education,
but it proved problematic for him as he switched between multiple institutions.
He finally obtained a degree in administration of justice in 1979. Meanwhile,
he supported himself with various jobs in park city,
Kansas at suburb of Wichita,
including as an assembler for a camping gear company,
a grocery store employee and an installation manager for a home security company
called ADT security services.
That third one occurred while BTK was active and was in act.
One of the main reasons why so many people were getting home security systems in
the first place let's old. It,
any of them know that the person they were allowing into their homes to make
themselves feel safer was the same person they wanted to be protected from in
1971,
Dennis RA married a woman called Paula jets and their two children together,
Carrie and Brian on the outside.
It seemed very much like your typical humdrum family life.
And it would be decades until people discovered that there was actually
something much darker hiding beneath the surface.
As we later found out after BTK was finally apprehended,
Dennis Rader did not have the type of traumatic childhood that we often
associate with serial killers.
He felt ignored by his parents because they worked long hours,
but that was about it even so sadistic urges began developing in Denis from an
early age, his sexual fantasies revolved around pain and.
He started by cutting out female forms from magazines, drawing,
gags and ropes around them and gluing them onto three by five index,
which carried around with him. As a teenager,
RA took up peeing into windows and stealing women's underwear.
He began getting sexually excited by seeing animals being tortured and killed.
He started off by watching chickens being sent to the slaughter,
but then advanced doing the killing himself, hanging a cat and a dog.
He enjoyed being spanked and tied up a bit lighted even more to see the same
done to women whenever he was aroused by such an act,
he called it Sparky big time.
And the point of climax was called the big G in fact,
Rader had a whole vocabulary or Kodak as he preferred it,
which he used in order to refer to his crimes.
He borrowed a lot of terms from true crime magazines.
From the 1950s and sixties,
he called his victims project while a killing was a hit.
He referred to the murderous persona that lived inside him full of violent
sexual impulses as the minute or when it was time to switch from his normal
everyday family guy, facade to the Menor. He called it going dark. And lastly,
he described the force that drove him to kill some kind of mysterious element
dubbed factor X.
There are two likely reasons why he came up with all of these terms.
According to psychologists,
the first would be to help distance himself from the reality of what he was
doing in his mind. He wasn't murdering a person. Nope.
He was going dark to work on a project and it couldn't be his fault.
If he was driven to do it by some magical factor acts.
The second reason was to simply make himself feel more special.
RA had the NASA cystic personality you'd expect from a killer like him.
And it exhibited in typical fashion, giving himself a name in the media,
taunting the police and trying to create some kind of mysterious impenetrable
persona that made him unique among killers.
The irony here is that by doing these things to make himself feel special,
he was displaying the standard behavior of an eager man called psychopath.
With time radio came Boulder and Boulder.
When it came to living out his S and M dreams, when he was with the air force,
he drew his fantasies on pieces of paper that he burned. When he left bass,
he claimed that he visited prostitutes,
but most of them were too IIM by him and refused to play out his ideas.
Sometimes he broke into homes and stole women's underwear,
which he added to his collection.
This was a habit which continued through his entire spree.
Radar took many keepsakes from his victims and for quick access,
he placed them in various spots around Wichita, which called Heidi holes.
Of course,
as the years went on drawings and voyeurism became insufficient to satisfy
Raiders urges.
It was only a matter of time until he finally progressed to what he truly
wanted. Murder RA carried out his first attack on January the 15th,
1974. And he started out big as he targeted an,
a family husband and wife,
Joseph and Julie Aero alongside two of their children. Nine year old,
Joseph junior Rens, 11 year old Josephine.
He did it in the morning as well while the children were getting ready for
school. And the family also had a dog which could have alerted the neighbors.
In other words, this was a high risk crime.
So Ray got pretty lucky that he wasn't caught right at the outset.
According to the killer himself,
he snuck inside the otros detached garage and waited for his opportunity.
Then a little after 8:30 AM, Joseph ju exited the house to go to school.
That is when Rader bombed with a knife into 22 caliber pistol,
forced him back inside and confronted the entire family in order to keep them at
ease.
He told the at terrors that this was a robbery and that they would not be harmed
if they did what he set the family complied. First,
the father put the dog outside and afterwards they allowed themselves to be
taken into the bedroom and tied up. At this point, it was too late for them.
They were completely at Ray's mercy, which did not exist.
He had been fantasizing about this moment for decades.
He killed the Aeros by strangulation and suffocation using either a length of
Rob or plastic bags.
Sometimes he would allow them to catch their breath and regain consciousness
before dying, just so he could strangle them again.
None of the victims were sexually assaulted.
Although the murderers semen was found at the scene and it later proved
instrumental in getting ready to convicted.
And if you want to make the crimes just a bit more horrifying,
the bodies were found by one of the other ERO children,
15 year old Charlie at terror at the scene,
Wichita police was stunned into shock.
Not only were these the most gruesome murders they had ever seen,
but they happened in broad daylight, in a choir neighborhood.
Plus the killer clearly planned the whole thing in advance.
As he was careful to bring along tapes, hoods wire, cutters, cords,
and most likely a gun, everything he needed in order to subdue the whole family.
There were no signs of forced entry or a struggle and no evidence of a robbery.
Apart from Joseph Tara's watch, which was missing after he was done,
the killer even left in the Atter car.
The circumstances surrounding the crimes didn't immediately scream Syria or
killer.
So the police investigated the possibility that the at terror might have been
marked for execution by a criminal organization. However,
looking into their back rounds,
they could find nothing to suggest a possible motive for such a thing.
Plus there was still the semen traces on the floor,
which definitely did not indicate a professional hit.
Ultimately when talking to the press,
the Wichita police chief Floyd Hanlin said that the crimes had been perpetrated
by a killer with a fetish
Just three months later, the killer struck again,
this time targeting 21 year olds, Catherine Bryce on April the fourth,
1974 radar broke into B Bright's home when she wasn't there and waited for her
return. When the young woman came back accompanied by her younger brother,
Kevin, they were greeted by a man with a gun. Again,
Rader played the role of a robber, reassuring his victims,
that as long as they gave him the money and the car keys,
he would not harm them. A gunpoint.
Kevin tied his sister to a chair and then went into the bedroom with the
intruder where he was also tied in gags. However,
once radar slipped and knotted stalking around his neck and began strangling
him, that is when Kevin realized the angry he was in and he started fight back.
The scuffle was brief because Ray pulled out a gun from his waistband and shot
Kevin Bright. He left the room for a moment, then returned and shot him again.
He didn't bother to check if his victim was dead,
probably because his mind was on his real target. Catherine Bright.
As a matter of fact, Kevin was still breathing in a Daisy,
managed to get out of the house and stumble into passing bystand who took him to
the hospital and called the police. When the authorities arrived,
they found Catherine Bright with multiple injuries, but still alive.
She had been stabbed three times in the abdomen and also had ligature marks
around her throat from being strangled. She was rushed to the hospital,
but she died a few hours later at the time,
the police did not associate Catherine Bright's murder with the deaths of the
Atari family raid. Didn't wear a mask when he attacked the brother and sister.
So they were able to get a description of the killer from Kevin Bright,
but this did not lead anywhere. Afterwards. The murders stopped for a few years,
right off the bat Raiders killings were away for him to get attention.
When his crimes weren't making headlines anymore,
he would rekindle public interest in them by writing to the media or the police.
His first attempt to communication happened in 19 74,
9 months after he killed the at terrors,
Ray contacted the Wichita Eagle anonymously and told them to look inside a
certain book at the local public library there,
they found a letter whose author was claiming credit for the Atero murders while
also dismissing the other police suspects as nothing but people wanting
publicity for his actions. The letter contained details about the killings, the,
it had not been made public. So the authenticity was beyond doubt,
but police asked the newspaper not to publish it in order to prevent more false
confessions, the complied,
but the competing witch at our son also got their hands on a copy and they
published parts of the letter in December.
Here are a few person quotes that illustrate the killers mentality.
I write this letter to you for the sake of the taxpayer, as well as your time.
Those three dude you have in custody are just talking to get publicity for the
terror murders. They know nothing at all.
I did it by myself and with no one's help. I'm sorry. This happened to society.
They're the ones who suffer the most. It hard to control myself.
When this monster ends my brain, I will never know, but it here to stay.
How does one cure himself off?
If you ask for help that you have killed for people,
they will laugh or hit the panic button and call the cops. I can't stop it.
So the monster goes on and hunts me as well as society.
Society can be thankful that there are ways for people like me to relieve myself
at time, by daydream of some victims, being torture and being mine.
Maybe you can stop him. I can't, he's already chosen his next victim or victims.
I don't know who they are yet. The next day after I read the paper, I will know,
but it too late. Good luck hunting yours truly guilty.
There was also the post script,
which was notable for mentioning for the first time,
the Monik by which this killer would be remembered. PS,
since sex criminals do not change their Mo or by nature cannot do so.
I will not change mine. The code word for me will be bind them, torture them,
kill them. B T K. You see he added again.
They will be on the next victim. So now the serial killer had a name B T K.
Now he might have noticed that the letter was rife with spelling and grammatical
errors. I certainly did reading it,
but the mistakes were seemingly done at random.
BTK appeared to struggle with simple mundane words,
but he had no problem spelling,
psychotic or perversion investigators realized early on that this was probably
an attempt by the criminal to make himself look more undereducated than he
actually was. And based on the content of the letter,
they also believed he studied criminal psychology. At one point curiously,
even though BTK clearly wanted to get credit for the crimes he committed.
There was no mention of Catherine Bright in the letter.
Another reason why police didn't connect the murder until later
BTK went quiet after 1974,
it seems like the five murders plus the letter were enough to satiate his
attention craving for a while.
At least he didn't strike again until 1977 on March the 17th,
he attacked 26 year old Shirley Vienna in her home.
She was there with her three children.
So she cooperated after he promised to leave them alone.
This time he actually kept his promise. BTK locked the children in the closet,
but did not harm them. Well, sort of in an interview decades later,
RA admitted that he intended to kill them as well,
but had to leave the scene before doing so.
Shirley Yann on the other hand felt the full force of his rage.
Police found her on the beds with her hands and feet bounds.
Having been suffocated with a plastic bag over a head and strangles with the
cord tied around her neck.
This time police suspected that this was the work of BTK from the start.
The crime scene was very similar to that at the, at terrors,
it happened in broad daylight. It had clearly been premeditated.
The killing method was the same. The phone lines were cut. And as the culprits,
even news the same signature,
not for the cord and important detail that was kept out to the newspapers.
BTK killed again. The same year,
25 year old Nancy Fox was found in our home strangled with our own nylon
stockings on December the eighth. This time though, BTK did something different.
He called in his own murder to the police. We're not really sure why,
but this crime was carried out at night and the killer had to break a window to
get in into the house. Since it differed from the other crime scenes,
Rader may have simp wanted to make sure that he got the credit for it.
His obsession with recognition was made pretty evident. The following year,
when BTK resumed his letter writing campaign to the media,
it started with a document sent to a local TV station in January, 1978.
His message was now clear, concise, and error free.
How many do I have to kill before I get my name in the paper or some national
attention?
The next month he sent another letter this time to the Wichita Eagle beacon.
It contained poem. He titled O death to Nancy.
He also first made mention of the mysterious fact to X, which drove him to kill.
But most importantly, he claimed to have murdered seven people,
not six taking credit for the death of Catherine Bright,
although he did not name her BTK laid dormant for the next eight years,
barring one extremely close call for a woman named Anna Williams,
who probably had to counter herself the luckiest person in Wichita,
unbeknownst to her BD Ked selected her as his next target on the 28th of April,
1979. He broke into her home and wait for Williams to arrive. However,
she was held up and came home much later than BTK anticipated,
frustrated and tired of waiting. He left before her return,
but made sure to let her know about what had happened.
RA took one of her scarves and later sent it back along with a note, which said,
be glad you weren't here because I was
The BTK case. Went quiet during the first half of the 1980s.
For whatever reason, Ray, not only temper's murderous impulses,
but also stopped writing letters in 1979 on the investigative side,
police formed a task force that assembled a list with hundreds of suspects and
slowly whitled it down until there was nobody left after about years with no
success, the task force was disbanded with no new leads.
More and more investigators were being moved to other assignments while BTK was
quickly becoming a cold case.
Many started to believe that BTK was gone from Wichita one way or another.
Even his profile said that as a compulsive psychopath,
he would never willingly give up killing and that it was likely that he was
either dead disabled or in prison.
None of those were true as it turned out what the police were searching for in
Rado was still right there along with him serving his community as a Cub scout
leader, a compliance officer,
and even as a council member of the Christ Lutheran church EST,
strangely enough,
the one piece of communication he had with the police during the 1980s was to
actually deny his involvement in the triple murder of the AGA family in 1987.
Although he did express admiration for the true killer, if nothing else,
this showed the authorities that BTK was not dead or in prison,
as it turned out, radar was not quite as inactive as authorities thought he was,
he killed three more women,
but the murders were sufficiently different from his usual Mo the police never
connected them to BDK. First was 53 year old Marine hedge and 1985.
One of RA's neighbors. This was his most daring crime.
He thought because he knew it was very risky to target someone in his immediate
area.
This is probably why he never claimed credit for the murder until after he was
caught. After he strangled him,
RA took her to his church where he posed her in positions and took photographs
afterwards. He dumped her body in a ditch along a remote, uh, road.
It was the photo time that BT gay made an effort not to have his crime
discovered. And it occurred eight years after the last murder.
So it wasn't surprising that Richard tar police didn't immediately assume the
crime was connected to its infamous serial killer. His next target, however,
was far more in line with Raider's usual approach on September the 16th,
19 86, 28 year old Vicki Waal was found in our strangled with a pair of nylon
stockings, why she was not considered a possible BTK victim.
We don't know probably because this was before the FA ladder from 1987.
So authorities were still under the assumption that BTK was gone afterwards,
came another long rest period for the killer Brady,
his 10th and final victim in January, 1991.
When he killed 62 year old Dolores Davis, as with Maureen head,
she tried to conceal his crime by taking her body and dumping it under a bridge.
Even though she was eventually discovered bound and strangled,
Dolores Davis was also not considered a BTK victim following his last murder.
Rader went to a very long period of an activity and the world didn't hear from
BTK. Again for 14 years
Throughout the 1990s, the killer remained silent and the BTK case went cold.
His identity probably could have remained a mystery forever.
If Raiders craving for attention, didn't suddenly come back with a vengeance.
Most believed that he was angered by an article published 30 years after the
Atari murders,
which said that Kansas students no longer remembered the name BTK in March,
2004. He sent a new letter to the Wichita Eagle.
This time claiming credit for the murder of Vicki Geral from 1986, as proof,
he included a copy of her driver's license in several photographs of her body,
which he had capped all these decades.
There was no doubt in the investigator's minds that the letter was genuine and
the case got hot. Once more, fortunately, for them,
there was no shortage of communication from the killer.
This time around clearly Rader felt that he had been quiet long enough.
So he sent 11 messages in one year.
The police's main concern was that this renewed zeal could mean that BTK was
getting ready to kill. Again.
Ray provided a lot of clues about his life and the messages he sent.
He claimed to have been born in 1939. He said his dad died in world war II,
and that he also served in the military.
He said that he used to repair copiers and that he once operated a ham radio.
Most of the claims were false, but their goal was to talk.
The authorities showing them that even with his help,
they still couldn't at BTK.
Eventually the killer got to Cockan made a big mistake that led to his capture.
In one letter, he asked the police if a floppy disc could be traced,
not they said no, because of course they did who in their right mind,
would've expected them to tell the truth in this situation for whatever reason,
Ray trusted them. So with his next communicate,
he included a floppy disc on the disc.
Police were able to recover a deleted word file,
which still had metadata on it that directed them to the Christ Lutheran church
and pointed the finger at Dennis Rader. After 30 long years,
investigators knew the name of BTK, but they needed more solid evidence.
Fortunately for them,
the killer had left his DNA at several of the crime scenes.
They obtained a subpoena for the medical records of Kerry raw RA's daughter and
compared a routine pap smear from her with the killer's DNA.
It was a familial match. Carrie's father was BTK.
Dennis Rader was finally arrested on February the 21st, 2005.
According to lead investigator,
Ken land radar was shocked that the police lied to him about the dis especially
land wear, whom the killer called by his first name and thought the,
who had a close report together. He later said in an interview, the,
the floppy did me in, after he got over his feelings of betrayal,
the investigation and subsequent trial went relatively smoothly.
Rader confessed to all 10 killings and received 10 consecutive life sentences
and will spend the rest of his days in maximum security prison.
So I'm not gonna ask whether you enjoyed that video, but I do hope you found it.
Interesting. If you did, please do hit that sums up button below.
Don't forget to check out my crime podcast.
It's linked to below and thank you for watching.